CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to pygmu2

This guide covers the architecture, conventions, and processes for developing pygmu2.

## Development Setup

### Using uv (recommended)

[uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) is a fast Python package manager:

```bash
# Install uv
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh

# Clone and setup
git clone https://github.com/yourname/pygmu2.git
cd pygmu2

# Install dependencies (creates .venv automatically)
uv sync

# Run tests to verify setup
uv run pytest
```

### Using pipenv

```bash
# Install pipenv
pip install pipenv

# Clone and setup
git clone https://github.com/yourname/pygmu2.git
cd pygmu2

# Install dependencies
pipenv install --dev

# Activate environment
pipenv shell

# Run tests to verify setup
pytest
```

## Project Structure

```
pygmu2/
├── src/pygmu2/
│   ├── __init__.py              # Package exports (update when adding PEs)
│   ├── processing_element.py    # PE and SourcePE base classes
│   ├── snippet.py               # Audio data container
│   ├── extent.py                # Temporal bounds
│   ├── renderer.py              # Renderer base + profiling
│   ├── audio_renderer.py        # Real-time playback
│   ├── null_renderer.py         # Silent rendering (testing)
│   ├── config.py                # Error handling configuration
│   ├── conversions.py           # dB/pitch/time conversions
│   ├── logger.py                # Logging utilities
│   │
│   │   # Processing Elements
│   ├── sine_pe.py               # Sine oscillator
│   ├── blit_saw_pe.py           # Band-limited sawtooth
│   ├── super_saw_pe.py          # Detuned unison saw
│   ├── adsr_pe.py               # ADSR envelope generator
│   ├── constant_pe.py           # Constant value
│   ├── ramp_pe.py               # Linear ramp
│   ├── gain_pe.py               # Gain control
│   ├── mix_pe.py                # Audio mixer
│   ├── delay_pe.py              # Sample delay
│   ├── crop_pe.py               # Temporal cropping
│   ├── loop_pe.py               # Looping
│   ├── slice_pe.py              # Slice/cut region + optional fades
│   ├── biquad_pe.py             # Biquad filter
│   ├── envelope_pe.py           # Envelope follower
│   ├── dynamics_pe.py           # Flexible dynamics processor
│   ├── compressor_pe.py         # Compressor/limiter/gate
│   ├── random_pe.py             # Random value generator
│   ├── window_pe.py             # Windowed statistics
│   ├── wav_reader_pe.py         # WAV file input
│   └── wav_writer_pe.py         # WAV file output
│
├── tests/                       # Unit tests (pytest)
├── examples/                    # Runnable example scripts
├── benchmarks/                  # Performance benchmarks
│   └── benchmark_pes.py         # Auto-discovering PE benchmark suite
├── pyproject.toml               # Project config (uv, pytest, tools)
├── uv.lock                      # uv lockfile (auto-generated)
├── Pipfile                      # pipenv dependencies (alternative)
├── Pipfile.lock                 # pipenv lockfile
└── LICENSE
```

## Architecture

### Processing Element Lifecycle

```
1. Construction     PE created with parameters
2. configure()      Renderer injects sample_rate into entire graph
3. set_source()     Renderer validates graph (purity, channels)
4. on_start()       Called bottom-up (inputs before outputs)
5. render()         Called repeatedly to generate audio
6. on_stop()        Called top-down (outputs before inputs)
```

### Graph Evaluation

Audio flows lazily through the graph:

```
render(start, duration) called on root PE
    └─> Root PE calls render() on its inputs
            └─> Inputs call render() on their inputs
                    └─> ... recursively to source PEs
```

Each `render()` call returns a `Snippet` containing exactly `duration` samples.

### Purity and State

**Pure PEs** produce the same output for the same input and can be shared:
- Most source PEs (SinePE, ConstantPE)
- Stateless transforms (GainPE, MixPE, CropPE)

**Stateful PEs** maintain internal state and cannot be shared:
- EnvelopePE (tracks envelope value)
- BiquadPE (filter state)
- BlitSawPE (phase accumulator)

The Renderer validates that stateful PEs have only one downstream consumer.

## Creating a New Processing Element

### Template

```python
"""
MyNewPE - Description of what it does.

Copyright (c) 2026 R. Dunbar Poor, Andy Milburn and pygmu2 contributors
MIT License
"""

from typing import Optional, Union
import numpy as np

from pygmu2.processing_element import ProcessingElement
from pygmu2.extent import Extent
from pygmu2.snippet import Snippet


class MyNewPE(ProcessingElement):
    """
    One-line summary.
    
    Detailed description of the PE's behavior, including:
    - What it does
    - Key parameters and their effects
    - Any important notes about state or purity
    
    Args:
        source: Input audio PE
        param1: Description (default: X)
        param2: Description, can be float or PE for modulation
    
    Example:
        result_stream = MyNewPE(source_stream, param1=0.5)
    """
    
    def __init__(
        self,
        source: ProcessingElement,
        param1: float = 1.0,
        param2: Union[float, ProcessingElement] = 0.0,
    ):
        self._source = source
        self._param1 = param1
        self._param2 = param2
        
        # State (if any)
        self._state: Optional[float] = None
    
    def inputs(self) -> list[ProcessingElement]:
        """Return list of input PEs."""
        result = [self._source]
        if isinstance(self._param2, ProcessingElement):
            result.append(self._param2)
        return result
    
    def is_pure(self) -> bool:
        """Return True if stateless, False if has internal state."""
        return self._state is None  # Or just: return False
    
    def channel_count(self) -> Optional[int]:
        """Return output channel count, or None to inherit from input."""
        return self._source.channel_count()
    
    def _compute_extent(self) -> Extent:
        """Compute and return this PE's temporal bounds."""
        return self._source.extent()
    
    def on_start(self) -> None:
        """Initialize state when rendering begins."""
        self._state = 0.0
    
    def on_stop(self) -> None:
        """Clean up when rendering ends."""
        self._state = None
    
    def _render(self, start: int, duration: int) -> Snippet:
        """Generate output samples."""
        # Get input
        source_snippet = self._source.render(start, duration)
        audio = source_snippet.data.astype(np.float64)
        
        # Get parameter (constant or from PE)
        if isinstance(self._param2, ProcessingElement):
            param2_snippet = self._param2.render(start, duration)
            param2 = param2_snippet.data[:, 0]
        else:
            param2 = self._param2
        
        # Process
        output = audio * self._param1 + param2
        
        return Snippet(start, output.astype(np.float32))
    
    def __repr__(self) -> str:
        return f"MyNewPE(param1={self._param1})"
```

### Checklist for New PEs

1. **Create the PE file** in `src/pygmu2/`
2. **Add to `__init__.py`**:
   - Import the class
   - Add to `__all__`
3. **Write unit tests** in `tests/test_myname_pe.py`
4. **Add benchmark config** (optional) in `benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py`
5. **Run tests**: `pipenv run pytest tests/test_myname_pe.py -v`
6. **Run full suite**: `pipenv run pytest`
7. **Add an example** (optional) in `examples/`

### Conventions

- **Naming**: `<Name>PE` for classes, `<name>_pe.py` for files
- **Parameters**: Use dB for levels, seconds for time, Hz for frequency
- **PE inputs**: Accept `Union[float, ProcessingElement]` for modulatable params
- **Docstrings**: Include Args, Example, and behavioral notes
- **Errors**: Use `config.handle_error()` instead of raising directly
- **Time parameters**:
  - Prefer defaults expressed in **seconds** (no implicit sample-rate assumptions).
  - Convert seconds→samples in `configure()` (after `super().configure(sample_rate)`) using `ProcessingElement._time_to_samples(...)`.
  - If you support both `*_samples` and `*_seconds`, accept them as `Optional[...]` and let `_time_to_samples` enforce mutual exclusion.

## Testing

### Running Tests

Using **uv** (recommended):

```bash
# All tests
uv run pytest

# Specific file
uv run pytest tests/test_sine_pe.py -v

# With coverage
uv run pytest --cov=src --cov-report=html

# Skip slow tests (if any)
uv run pytest -m "not slow"
```

Using **pipenv**:

```bash
# All tests
pipenv run pytest

# Specific file
pipenv run pytest tests/test_sine_pe.py -v

# With coverage
pipenv run pytest --cov=src --cov-report=html

# Skip slow tests (if any)
pipenv run pytest -m "not slow"
```

### Test Structure

```python
"""Tests for MyNewPE."""

import numpy as np
import pytest
from pygmu2 import MyNewPE, SinePE, NullRenderer


class TestMyNewPEBasics:
    """Test creation and properties."""
    
    def test_create_default(self):
        pe_stream = MyNewPE(SinePE(frequency=440.0))
        assert pe_stream.param1 == 1.0
    
    def test_inputs(self):
        source_stream = SinePE(frequency=440.0)
        pe_stream = MyNewPE(source_stream)
        assert source_stream in pe_stream.inputs()


class TestMyNewPERender:
    """Test rendering behavior."""
    
    @pytest.fixture
    def renderer(self):
        return NullRenderer(sample_rate=44100)
    
    def test_render_returns_snippet(self, renderer):
        pe_stream = MyNewPE(SinePE(frequency=440.0))
        renderer.set_source(pe_stream)
        renderer.start()
        
        snippet = pe_stream.render(0, 1000)
        
        assert snippet.data.shape == (1000, 1)
```

## Profiling and Benchmarks

### Built-in Profiling

The Renderer has optional profiling:

```python
renderer = NullRenderer(sample_rate=44100)
renderer.enable_profiling()
renderer.set_source(my_pe)
renderer.start()

# Render some audio
for i in range(100):
    renderer.render(i * 1024, 1024)

renderer.stop()
renderer.print_profile_report()
```

### Benchmark Suite

Using **uv**:

```bash
# Run all benchmarks
uv run python benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py

# Quick mode (fewer iterations)
uv run python benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py --quick

# List discovered PEs
uv run python benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py --list

# Buffer size scaling test
uv run python benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py --scaling
```

Using **pipenv**:

```bash
# Run all benchmarks
pipenv run python benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py

# Quick mode (fewer iterations)
pipenv run python benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py --quick
```

### Adding Benchmark Configs

In `benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py`, add to `setup_fallback_configs()`:

```python
register_fallback("MyNewPE", [
    BenchmarkConfig(
        "MyNewPE (config1)",
        lambda: MyNewPE(SinePE(frequency=440.0), param1=1.0),
        "category"
    ),
])
```

### Performance Tips

- Use numpy vectorized operations, avoid Python loops
- For IIR filters, use `scipy.signal.lfilter`
- For sliding window operations, use `scipy.ndimage` filters
- Profile before optimizing: `pipenv run python -m cProfile -s cumtime script.py`

## Error Handling

Use `config.handle_error()` instead of raising exceptions directly:

```python
from pygmu2.config import handle_error

# Non-fatal error (warns in lenient mode, raises in strict mode)
if something_wrong:
    if handle_error("Something went wrong"):
        return default_value  # Lenient mode fallback

# Fatal error (always raises)
if critical_error:
    handle_error("Critical failure", fatal=True)

# With custom exception type
handle_error("Invalid value", fatal=True, exception_class=ValueError)
```

## Code Style

### Formatting

```bash
uv run black src tests
# or: pipenv run black src tests
```

### Type Checking

```bash
uv run mypy src
# or: pipenv run mypy src
```

### Linting

```bash
uv run flake8 src tests
# or: pipenv run flake8 src tests
```

### Import Order

```python
# Standard library
from typing import Optional, Union
import numpy as np

# Third-party (if any)
from scipy.signal import lfilter

# Local
from pygmu2.processing_element import ProcessingElement
from pygmu2.snippet import Snippet
```

## Git Workflow

1. Create a branch for your feature
2. Write tests first (TDD encouraged)
3. Implement the feature
4. Run the full test suite
5. Update documentation if needed
6. Create a pull request

### Commit Messages

```
Add MyNewPE for doing something useful

- Describe what it does
- Note any important implementation details
- Reference any related issues
```

## Questions?

Open an issue on GitHub or check existing issues for similar questions.

Commit message:

Codify immutable data buffers.  Clean up SpatialPE

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to pygmu2

This guide covers the architecture, conventions, and processes for developing pygmu2.

## Development Setup

### Using uv (recommended)

[uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) is a fast Python package manager:

```bash
# Install uv
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh

# Clone and setup
git clone https://github.com/yourname/pygmu2.git
cd pygmu2

# Install dependencies (creates .venv automatically)
uv sync

# Run tests to verify setup
uv run pytest
```

### Using pipenv

```bash
# Install pipenv
pip install pipenv

# Clone and setup
git clone https://github.com/yourname/pygmu2.git
cd pygmu2

# Install dependencies
pipenv install --dev

# Activate environment
pipenv shell

# Run tests to verify setup
pytest
```

## Project Structure

```
pygmu2/
├── src/pygmu2/
│   ├── __init__.py              # Package exports (update when adding PEs)
│   ├── processing_element.py    # PE and SourcePE base classes
│   ├── snippet.py               # Audio data container
│   ├── extent.py                # Temporal bounds
│   ├── renderer.py              # Renderer base + profiling
│   ├── audio_renderer.py        # Real-time playback
│   ├── null_renderer.py         # Silent rendering (testing)
│   ├── config.py                # Error handling configuration
│   ├── conversions.py           # dB/pitch/time conversions
│   ├── logger.py                # Logging utilities
│   │
│   │   # Processing Elements
│   ├── sine_pe.py               # Sine oscillator
│   ├── blit_saw_pe.py           # Band-limited sawtooth
│   ├── super_saw_pe.py          # Detuned unison saw
│   ├── adsr_pe.py               # ADSR envelope generator
│   ├── constant_pe.py           # Constant value
│   ├── ramp_pe.py               # Linear ramp
│   ├── gain_pe.py               # Gain control
│   ├── mix_pe.py                # Audio mixer
│   ├── delay_pe.py              # Sample delay
│   ├── crop_pe.py               # Temporal cropping
│   ├── loop_pe.py               # Looping
│   ├── slice_pe.py              # Slice/cut region + optional fades
│   ├── biquad_pe.py             # Biquad filter
│   ├── envelope_pe.py           # Envelope follower
│   ├── dynamics_pe.py           # Flexible dynamics processor
│   ├── compressor_pe.py         # Compressor/limiter/gate
│   ├── random_pe.py             # Random value generator
│   ├── window_pe.py             # Windowed statistics
│   ├── wav_reader_pe.py         # WAV file input
│   └── wav_writer_pe.py         # WAV file output
│
├── tests/                       # Unit tests (pytest)
├── examples/                    # Runnable example scripts
├── benchmarks/                  # Performance benchmarks
│   └── benchmark_pes.py         # Auto-discovering PE benchmark suite
├── pyproject.toml               # Project config (uv, pytest, tools)
├── uv.lock                      # uv lockfile (auto-generated)
├── Pipfile                      # pipenv dependencies (alternative)
├── Pipfile.lock                 # pipenv lockfile
└── LICENSE
```

## Architecture

### Processing Element Lifecycle

```
1. Construction     PE created with parameters
2. configure()      Renderer injects sample_rate into entire graph
3. set_source()     Renderer validates graph (purity, channels)
4. on_start()       Called bottom-up (inputs before outputs)
5. render()         Called repeatedly to generate audio
6. on_stop()        Called top-down (outputs before inputs)
```

### Graph Evaluation

Audio flows lazily through the graph:

```
render(start, duration) called on root PE
    └─> Root PE calls render() on its inputs
            └─> Inputs call render() on their inputs
                    └─> ... recursively to source PEs
```

Each `render()` call returns a `Snippet` containing exactly `duration` samples.

## Immutability Contract

Processing elements must treat input `Snippet` buffers as immutable.
Do not modify `snippet.data` from any input PE in-place. Always write into
a new buffer (or a copy) when producing output. This prevents accidental
buffer aliasing across the graph and keeps PE behavior consistent.

### Purity and State

**Pure PEs** produce the same output for the same input and can be shared:
- Most source PEs (SinePE, ConstantPE)
- Stateless transforms (GainPE, MixPE, CropPE)

**Stateful PEs** maintain internal state and cannot be shared:
- EnvelopePE (tracks envelope value)
- BiquadPE (filter state)
- BlitSawPE (phase accumulator)

The Renderer validates that stateful PEs have only one downstream consumer.

## Creating a New Processing Element

### Template

```python
"""
MyNewPE - Description of what it does.

Copyright (c) 2026 R. Dunbar Poor, Andy Milburn and pygmu2 contributors
MIT License
"""

from typing import Optional, Union
import numpy as np

from pygmu2.processing_element import ProcessingElement
from pygmu2.extent import Extent
from pygmu2.snippet import Snippet


class MyNewPE(ProcessingElement):
    """
    One-line summary.
    
    Detailed description of the PE's behavior, including:
    - What it does
    - Key parameters and their effects
    - Any important notes about state or purity
    
    Args:
        source: Input audio PE
        param1: Description (default: X)
        param2: Description, can be float or PE for modulation
    
    Example:
        result_stream = MyNewPE(source_stream, param1=0.5)
    """
    
    def __init__(
        self,
        source: ProcessingElement,
        param1: float = 1.0,
        param2: Union[float, ProcessingElement] = 0.0,
    ):
        self._source = source
        self._param1 = param1
        self._param2 = param2
        
        # State (if any)
        self._state: Optional[float] = None
    
    def inputs(self) -> list[ProcessingElement]:
        """Return list of input PEs."""
        result = [self._source]
        if isinstance(self._param2, ProcessingElement):
            result.append(self._param2)
        return result
    
    def is_pure(self) -> bool:
        """Return True if stateless, False if has internal state."""
        return self._state is None  # Or just: return False
    
    def channel_count(self) -> Optional[int]:
        """Return output channel count, or None to inherit from input."""
        return self._source.channel_count()
    
    def _compute_extent(self) -> Extent:
        """Compute and return this PE's temporal bounds."""
        return self._source.extent()
    
    def on_start(self) -> None:
        """Initialize state when rendering begins."""
        self._state = 0.0
    
    def on_stop(self) -> None:
        """Clean up when rendering ends."""
        self._state = None
    
    def _render(self, start: int, duration: int) -> Snippet:
        """Generate output samples."""
        # Get input
        source_snippet = self._source.render(start, duration)
        audio = source_snippet.data.astype(np.float64)
        
        # Get parameter (constant or from PE)
        if isinstance(self._param2, ProcessingElement):
            param2_snippet = self._param2.render(start, duration)
            param2 = param2_snippet.data[:, 0]
        else:
            param2 = self._param2
        
        # Process
        output = audio * self._param1 + param2
        
        return Snippet(start, output.astype(np.float32))
    
    def __repr__(self) -> str:
        return f"MyNewPE(param1={self._param1})"
```

### Checklist for New PEs

1. **Create the PE file** in `src/pygmu2/`
2. **Add to `__init__.py`**:
   - Import the class
   - Add to `__all__`
3. **Write unit tests** in `tests/test_myname_pe.py`
4. **Add benchmark config** (optional) in `benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py`
5. **Run tests**: `pipenv run pytest tests/test_myname_pe.py -v`
6. **Run full suite**: `pipenv run pytest`
7. **Add an example** (optional) in `examples/`

### Conventions

- **Naming**: `<Name>PE` for classes, `<name>_pe.py` for files
- **Parameters**: Use dB for levels, seconds for time, Hz for frequency
- **PE inputs**: Accept `Union[float, ProcessingElement]` for modulatable params
- **Docstrings**: Include Args, Example, and behavioral notes
- **Errors**: Use `config.handle_error()` instead of raising directly
- **Time parameters**:
  - Prefer defaults expressed in **seconds** (no implicit sample-rate assumptions).
  - Convert seconds→samples in `configure()` (after `super().configure(sample_rate)`) using `ProcessingElement._time_to_samples(...)`.
  - If you support both `*_samples` and `*_seconds`, accept them as `Optional[...]` and let `_time_to_samples` enforce mutual exclusion.

## Testing

### Running Tests

Using **uv** (recommended):

```bash
# All tests
uv run pytest

# Specific file
uv run pytest tests/test_sine_pe.py -v

# With coverage
uv run pytest --cov=src --cov-report=html

# Skip slow tests (if any)
uv run pytest -m "not slow"
```

Using **pipenv**:

```bash
# All tests
pipenv run pytest

# Specific file
pipenv run pytest tests/test_sine_pe.py -v

# With coverage
pipenv run pytest --cov=src --cov-report=html

# Skip slow tests (if any)
pipenv run pytest -m "not slow"
```

### Test Structure

```python
"""Tests for MyNewPE."""

import numpy as np
import pytest
from pygmu2 import MyNewPE, SinePE, NullRenderer


class TestMyNewPEBasics:
    """Test creation and properties."""
    
    def test_create_default(self):
        pe_stream = MyNewPE(SinePE(frequency=440.0))
        assert pe_stream.param1 == 1.0
    
    def test_inputs(self):
        source_stream = SinePE(frequency=440.0)
        pe_stream = MyNewPE(source_stream)
        assert source_stream in pe_stream.inputs()


class TestMyNewPERender:
    """Test rendering behavior."""
    
    @pytest.fixture
    def renderer(self):
        return NullRenderer(sample_rate=44100)
    
    def test_render_returns_snippet(self, renderer):
        pe_stream = MyNewPE(SinePE(frequency=440.0))
        renderer.set_source(pe_stream)
        renderer.start()
        
        snippet = pe_stream.render(0, 1000)
        
        assert snippet.data.shape == (1000, 1)
```

## Profiling and Benchmarks

### Built-in Profiling

The Renderer has optional profiling:

```python
renderer = NullRenderer(sample_rate=44100)
renderer.enable_profiling()
renderer.set_source(my_pe)
renderer.start()

# Render some audio
for i in range(100):
    renderer.render(i * 1024, 1024)

renderer.stop()
renderer.print_profile_report()
```

### Benchmark Suite

Using **uv**:

```bash
# Run all benchmarks
uv run python benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py

# Quick mode (fewer iterations)
uv run python benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py --quick

# List discovered PEs
uv run python benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py --list

# Buffer size scaling test
uv run python benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py --scaling
```

Using **pipenv**:

```bash
# Run all benchmarks
pipenv run python benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py

# Quick mode (fewer iterations)
pipenv run python benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py --quick
```

### Adding Benchmark Configs

In `benchmarks/benchmark_pes.py`, add to `setup_fallback_configs()`:

```python
register_fallback("MyNewPE", [
    BenchmarkConfig(
        "MyNewPE (config1)",
        lambda: MyNewPE(SinePE(frequency=440.0), param1=1.0),
        "category"
    ),
])
```

### Performance Tips

- Use numpy vectorized operations, avoid Python loops
- For IIR filters, use `scipy.signal.lfilter`
- For sliding window operations, use `scipy.ndimage` filters
- Profile before optimizing: `pipenv run python -m cProfile -s cumtime script.py`

## Error Handling

Use `config.handle_error()` instead of raising exceptions directly:

```python
from pygmu2.config import handle_error

# Non-fatal error (warns in lenient mode, raises in strict mode)
if something_wrong:
    if handle_error("Something went wrong"):
        return default_value  # Lenient mode fallback

# Fatal error (always raises)
if critical_error:
    handle_error("Critical failure", fatal=True)

# With custom exception type
handle_error("Invalid value", fatal=True, exception_class=ValueError)
```

## Code Style

### Formatting

```bash
uv run black src tests
# or: pipenv run black src tests
```

### Type Checking

```bash
uv run mypy src
# or: pipenv run mypy src
```

### Linting

```bash
uv run flake8 src tests
# or: pipenv run flake8 src tests
```

### Import Order

```python
# Standard library
from typing import Optional, Union
import numpy as np

# Third-party (if any)
from scipy.signal import lfilter

# Local
from pygmu2.processing_element import ProcessingElement
from pygmu2.snippet import Snippet
```

## Git Workflow

1. Create a branch for your feature
2. Write tests first (TDD encouraged)
3. Implement the feature
4. Run the full test suite
5. Update documentation if needed
6. Create a pull request

### Commit Messages

```
Add MyNewPE for doing something useful

- Describe what it does
- Note any important implementation details
- Reference any related issues
```

## Questions?

Open an issue on GitHub or check existing issues for similar questions.
